--- PAGE 8 ---
Illustrations 
1. Laboratory and Oratory, Heinrich Khunrath, Amphitheatrum 
sapientit£ (1609) 
9 
2. Library and Laboratory, Michael Maier, Tripus aureus (1618) 
10 
3. The Four Elements Symbolized, Petrus Bonus, Pretiosa margarita 
novella (1546) 
18 
4. Nature and Art, Michael Maier, Symbola auret£ Menst£ (1617) 
20 
5. Fludd's Universal Correspondence Theory, Utriusque cosmi 
historia (1617, 1619) 
22 
6. The Earth as Nurse, Michael Maier, Atalanta fogiens (1617) 
25 
7. Itinerant Seller of Medicines, engraving by T. Kitchin (fl. 1750) 
after David Teniers 
28 
8. Alchemical Master and Disciple, Elias Ashmole, Theatrum 
Chemicum Britannicum (1652) 
32 
9. Outdoor Scene, Hieronymus Braunschweig, Liber de arte 
Distillandi de Compositis (1512) 
41 
10. Ellesmere MS Canon's Yeoman 
46 
11. Satan, Alchemist and Antichrist, Antichristus (1480?) 
51 
12. Temptress-Woman, Devil, Alchemist, engraved by A. Matham 
(c. 1599-1660) 
51 
13. The Fall of Icarus; Against Astrologers, Alciati, Les Emblemes 
de Maistre Andre Alciat (1540) 
66 
14. Alchemists, Alexander Barclay, translation of Sebastian Brant, 
Ship of Fools (1509) 
69 
15. Athena's Birth, Jove and Danae, Michael Maier, Atalanta 
fogiens (1617) 
129 
16. Rudolph II in the Laboratory of his Alchemist, painting by 
W. Brozik (1881) 
135 
17. "Le Marchand d'orvietan de Campagne" by Bonnet (19th century), 
after P. Careme (1734-1796) 
137 


--- PAGE 9 ---
Vlll 
18. Mercurius, Basil Valentine, Duodecim Claves, in Must£um 
Hermeticum (1678) 
Illustrations 
141 
19. Alchemist following Nature, Michael Maier, Atalantafugiens (1617) 
152 
20. Alchemical Laboratory (sixteenth century[?]) 
161 
21. Conjunctio, Rosarium Philosophorum (1550) 
177 
22. Entombed King and Queen, Johann Mylius, Philosophia Reformata 
(1622) 
177 
23. Stages in the Alchemical Process, Andreas Libavius, Alchymia 
(1606) 
178 
24. Symbolic birds, Book of Lambspringk, in Must£um Hermeticum 
(1678) 
180 
25. Salamander, Michael Maier, Atalanta fugiens (1617) 
188 
26. Tympanum, Nicolas Flamel, Exposition of the Hieroglyphicall 
Figures (1624) 
209 
27. Resurrected Christ, Rosarium Philosophorum (1550) 
221 
28. Last Judgment, Elias Ashmole, Theatrum Chemicum 
Britannicum (1652) 
258 


--- PAGE 19 ---
8 
Darke Hierogliphicks 
tween practical or exoteric alchemy and a second type of esoteric, spiritual, or 
philosophical alchemy. Although these two traditions are often intermingled in 
the writings of the alchemists themselves, the distinction between them is im-
portant when examining the portrayals of alchemy and alchemists in medieval 
and Renaissance literature. Central to this second type is knowledge of the se-
crets of nature, not for the purpose of achieving dominion over nature, as with 
the philosopher's stone or a magical elixir, but rather a disinterested, unpragmatic 
knowledge of the origin, composition, and secret operations of all aspects of 
creation. Tymme's emphasis on knowledge to enable informed analysis of nature 
("the anatomizing of every mesenteriall veine") is anticipated in Roger Bacon's 
discussion, again in the Opus Tertium, of speculative alchemy, which "treats of 
the generation of things from the elements and of all inanimate things and of 
simple and composite humours, of common stones, gems, marbles, of gold and 
other metals, of sulphurs and salts and pigments, ... and other things without 
limit, concerning which we have nothing in the books of Aristotle."? 
More important than knowledge of the natural world is esoteric alchemy's 
concentration on spiritual and philosophical values and ideals, especially as they 
impinge on the inner life of the individual adept. For E.]. Holmyard, this type 
with its strong religious and mystical overtones has its origins in the exoteric 
alchemist's ,recognition that divine grace is requisite to obtaining the philosopher's 
stone; this in turn, "gradually developed into a devotional system where the 
mundane transmutation of metals became merely symbolic of the transforma-
tion of sinful man into a perfect being through prayer and submission to the 
will of God. The two kinds of alchemy were often inextricably mixed; however, 
in some of the mystical treatises it is clear that the authors are not concerned 
with material substances but are employing the language of exoteric alchemy for 
the sole purpose of expressing theological, philosophical, or mystical beliefs and 
aspirations."s The close proximity of the two types of alchemy is evidenced in 
pictorial art as well. The circular engraving from Heinrich Khunrath's 
Amphitheatrum sapientitf (1609) shows the sacred side in the figure of the adept 
praying in the oratorium, to the left of the central axis; the laboratorium with 
its clutter of apparatus is to the right (fig. O. A similar format reinforces the 
relation between library and laboratory-esoteric and exoteric-in figure 2 from 
Michael Maier's Tripus aureus (1618). 
Reflecting the diverse strands of magic, Gnosticism, Neoplatonism, and 
Christianity that had entered Greek alchemy between the time of Bolus and 
Zosimos (ca. 200 B.C.-300 A.D.), esoteric alchemy became a way of life for its 
most devout disciples: a vast religious and philosophical system aimed at the 
purification and regeneration of their lives. But in addition to being an internal, 
salvationist process, esoteric alchemy also set forth a worldview, which, as sum-
marized later in this introduction, placed special emphasis on the unity of all 
things as created by God and the harmonious relationship between the greater 
world and the lesser world of man. 


--- PAGE 21 ---
10 
Darke Hierogliphicks 
Figure 2. Library and Laboratory. Michael Maier, Tripus au reus (1618). By permission of 
the University of Delaware Library, Newark, Delaware. 
earliest alchemical fragments dating from perhaps the second century A.D.,9 and 
also in the "Visions" of Zosimos included in his treatise O/Virtue. 10 The charac-
teristically pious tone of the majority of medieval alchemical treatises results 
largely from the art's religious associations, and the mystical language and alle-
gorical mode of such Renaissance hermeticists as Jakob Boehme, Michael Maier, 
Robert Fludd, and others to be considered in chapter 7 is an expression of eso-
teric alchemy. It is this tradition that informs the selection from Martin Luther's 
Table- Talk quoted at the beginning of that chapter, and in the seventeenth cen-
tury it is manifest in the hermetic writings of Thomas Vaughan and in the her-
metically inspired poetry of his brother, Henry. 
While it is convenient and historically justifiable to divide alchemy accord-
ing to these two basic orientations, exoteric and esoteric, it is also essential to 
recognize that these types are often combined in the writings of the same au-
thor. As the secrets of transmuting base metal are cryptically unfolded, the 
discourse's allegorical and moral level imparts directions for the practitioner's 
spiritual purification and salvation; or, more commonly, the evolving "stone" 
becomes the symbol for, or direct reflection of, stages in the subject's inner puri-
fication. Useful examples of this duality of expression are contained in Patrick 
Scot's Tillage 0/ Light (1623), one of the most interesting treatises belonging to 
the tradition of spiritual and philosophical alchemy in the seventeenth century, 
and a work to which I will return in chapter 7. Although Scot categorically 


--- PAGE 30 ---
Backgrounds, Definitions, and Preliminaries 
19 
attributed to Hermes Trismegistus. The collective effect of these influences was 
actually and symbolically the death of alchemy, the "medieval" science. 
The sulphur-mercury theory also derives from aspects of the old worldview 
and is the basis for Renaissance notions of the natural formation of metals and 
minerals in the earth and their artificial production through alchemy. If all 
sublunary substances are in a state of flux as the result of the imposition of dif-
ferent forms upon prime matter, it follows that metals, too, could be changed 
through recombining or altering the proportion of the elements that comprise 
them. The sulphur-mercury theory also draws on the idea of primary opposi-
tion inherent in the Aristotelian view: "sulphur" is identified with fire and pos-
sesses the qualities of hotness and dryness; "mercury," identified with water, pos-
sesses coldness and moistness. These two principles interact in the form of sub-
terranean vapors or exhalations (the former "male," the latter "female"), and if 
the conjunction occurs under proper conditions-the degree of heat is espe-
cially crucial-new metals are produced within the womb of the earth.46 The 
analogy between the natural and alchemical processes and related doctrines is 
visually represented in the engraving entitled, in translation, "Just as nature, art 
makes metals out of sulphur and mercury" (fig. 4), from Michael Maier's Symbola 
auret£ Menst£ (1617). 
For the alchemists, two extremely important corollaries developed from the 
four elements theory. Because in alchemy manipulation of the elements is con-
ducted by human agents rather than nature, they came to consider their art as 
an imitation of nature, an artificial duplication of the subterranean processes 
that cause the conception and growth of metals. Second, because these artificial 
efforts were thought to produce gold more rapidly than the natural processes, 
alchemists continually described themselves as improvers or perfecters of na-
ture, able to accomplish in a few weeks or months what nature had taken centu-
ries to produce. Elias Ashmole, for example, states that ''As Nature in her work 
below used two hot Workmen so will I; and because we cannot tarry her leisure, 
and long time she taketh to that purpose, we will match and countervail her 
little Heats with proportions answerable and meet for our time, that we may do 
that in fourry dayes which she doth in as many years. "47 For this reason, as noted 
earlier, H.]. Sheppard sees alchemy as effecting "alterations of duration in some 
linear time scale." Thus, alchemy was an important manifestation of the Renais-
sance debate on the relative powers of "art" versus "nature" although it has not 
generally been considered in this context. 
Another alchemical doctrine that was wholly compatible, in fact synony-
mous, with the medieval-Renaissance worldview was that of the macrocosm and 
microcosm and the complex system of correspondences and "sympathies" that 
link them. The primacy of this relationship in alchemy, however, is much less 
familiar than its presence in Renaissance and seventeenth-century literature. As 
previously mentioned, the possibility of transmutation was predicated on the 
idea that underlying all "forms" in which substances appear there is only one 


--- PAGE 31 ---
20 
Darke Hierogliphicks 
Figure 4. Narure and An. Michael Maier, Symbola auretf Menstf 
(1617). By permission of The Huntington Library, San Marino, 
California. 
prima materia. The macrocosm-microcosm idea is an extension of this theory 
and of equally ancient origin. "The One is All"-and its visual counterpart, the 
ouroboros-is one of the oldest motifs in alchemy, pervading the Tabula 
Smaragdina or Emerald Table of Hermes, which according to two different ver-
sions was either found in the tomb of Hermes Trismegistus by Alexander the 
Great or else "taken from the hands of the dead Hermes in a cave near Hebron, 
some ages after the Flood, by Sarah the wife of Abraham. "48 Its supposed antiq-
uity and semidivine authorship caused it to be regarded as the most sacred book 
of alchemy, revealing cryptically the means of producing the philosopher's stone. 
Its opening precepts emphasize the correspondences between the greater world 
and the lesser: "That which is beneath is like that which is above: & that which 
is above, is like that which is beneath, to worke the miracles of one thing. And 
as all things have ptoceeded from one, by the meditation of one, so all things 
have sprung from this one thing by adaptation."49 Explicit in this passage is the 
idea of resemblance and analogy between the celestial and sublunary spheres 
and their creation by a single divine being or principle acting upon a common 
underlying substance and for a single purpose. 
Because of their reliance on these common assumptions, natural magic and 
alchemy were often linked together. Like the magus, the alchemist saw himself 
as one who, although operating within the traditional worldview, was able to 
alter and manipulate the normal course of nature through highly specialized 


--- PAGE 35 ---
24 
Darke Hierogliphicks 
follows the impregnation or conjunction, has run its course. In Maier's Emblema 
II, "His nurse is the earth" (fig. 6), this doctrine is curiously depicted through 
combining this precept from the Emerald Table with the myths of Mother Earth 
and Romulus and Remus, and the notion of the philosopher's stone as micro-
cosm. Lead and iron are base metals because their "maturation" is incomplete; 
gold and silver are purer because they have "grown ripe" over a prolonged pe-
riod. An important axiom of alchemy and pre-seventeenth century natural his-
tory is that nature always "strives" to make gold, and the "souls" of base metals 
continually aspire to this state of perfection. Further, the volatility of substances 
within the alchemists' vessels is seen as evidence of the "spirits'" desire to escape 
the torture of the furnace. Such terms and concepts, often reminiscent of primi-
tive myth and folklore, are commonplaces of alchemical animism and anthro-
pomorphism and appear frequently in literary and visual representations of the 
art. In short, animism and hylowism, together with the theories of the four 
elements, universal correspondences, and the unity of matter, were the links that 
securely bound alchemical theory to the common worldview of the Middle Ages 
and Renaissance. 
Literary authors of the late Middle Ages and early modern period were usually 
more interested in the distinctly human aspects of alchemy than in its theory 
and history. While isolated theoretical and historical details appear frequently 
enough in literary treatments-as a basis for imagery, simile, or metaphor; to 
lend an element of concreteness and realism; to create an aura of "learnedness" 
or its opposite-such details are most often subordinated to the overall demands 
of portrayal of character and distinctly human situations. At its most successful, 
literary alchemy has the human condition as its prime concern, but it is the 
human condition as touched, or "worked upon," by recognizable aspects of the 
theory and practice of the art. Chaucer, Erasmus, Jonson, and Samuel Butler, to 
name only four, used alchemy to represent the flawed nature of mankind, creat-
ing characters corrupted less because of their involvement in alchemical matters 
than by the presence of deeper evils that have led them to this involvement. For 
example, in Chaucer's Canon's Yeoman, in Jonson's Face and Subtle and their 
victims, or in Butler's Hudibras and Ralph, alchemy may be both a cause and an 
effect of human corruption, but it is more frequently a means of objectifying 
the consequences of original sin than of representing the evil itself. Alchemy is 
splendidly equipped to represent moral transformation and transmutation, some-
times from evil to good, but also, in works belonging to the satirical tradition, 
from good or potential good to evil. 
Just as there are varieties of alchemy corresponding to differing definitions 
and objectives, so there exists a wide range of types of alchemists, distinguished 
from each other according to their practices and intentions. These types are 
present in the works of both alchemical writers and in the creations of the liter-
ary authors whom I will be considering. Because the portrayal of alchemical 


--- PAGE 36 ---
Backgrounds, Definitions, and Preliminaries 
.E M. B L EM.\ I r. 
De [ecru:.! :-lottmi. 
N Lrtrix ejus terra eft. 
EPIGRAMMA II. 
R OIlZltltl4 hiTt.tlttp.tpTeJFjfeftd ,!beTa c.:tu 
Jupiter) d~f1C7tf ,fertllr)1 d1feldes .~ 
9..!!.idmimm,tener.e SAP I E ~ T U:'1 'Z:ijcr.l P .'Z. 0 LIS 
25 
S; ferim,u T E R. R. A .\1 I.tc7e ntftrijfijl!O r 
1'.'in.:u/.zft tant.M HerollJ bejht p.t':'it, 
Q..2:-\. STU:; ,wi NUT 1\.1 X T E R. R E U 5 0 ~U3 1 '}) eri t ? 
Figure 6. The Earth as Nurse. Michael Maier, Atalantafogiens (1617). 
By permission of the University of Delaware Libraty, Newark, Delaware. 


--- PAGE 138 ---
Ben Jomon and the Drama of Alchemy 
127 
cal sigils as "stale, and common," preferring instead to incorporate Drugger's 
name in a magical configuration that will attract customers through occult in-
fluences: "Form'd in some mystick character; whose radii, / Striking the senses 
of the passers by, / Shall, by a vertuall influence, breed affections, / That may 
result upon the partie ownes it" (2.6.15-18). Not the least of the delights in this 
little episode is Jonson's exquisite use of inflated language for comic purposes; 
the abysmally crude design for Drugger's sign is accompanied by Subtle's re-
mark: "That's his signe. / And here's now mysterie, and hieroglyphick!' (2.6.23-
24). 
Jonson's inclusion of several references to alchemical interpretations of myth 
effectively recapitulates this familiar feature of Renaissance alchemical writing. 
For example, Mammon's detailed allegorical interpretation of Jason's quest for 
the golden fleece would arouse neither humor nor special interest if it remained 
in its original context within the alchemical tradition. I? Such, however, is not 
the case when it is transformed into blank verse and spoken by Mammon to the 
skeptical Surly: 
I have a peece ofIASONS fleece, too, 
Which was no other, then a booke of alchemie, 
Writ in large sheepe-skin, a good fat ram-veil am. 
Such was PYfHAGORA'S thigh, PANDORA'S tub; 
And, all that fable ofMEDEAS charmes, 
The manner of our worke: The Bulls, our fornace, 
Still breathing fire; our argente-vive, the Dragon: 
The Dragons teeth, mercury sublimate, 
That keepes the whitenesse, hardnesse, and the biting; 
And they are gather'd, into IASON's helme, 
(Th' alembeke) and then sow'd in MARS his field, 
And, thence, sublim'd so often, till they are fix'd. 
Both this, th' Hesperian garden, CADMUS storie, 
JOVE's shower, the boone of MIDAS, ARGUS eyes, 
BOCCACE his Demogorgon, thousands more, 
All abstract riddles of our stone. [2.1.89-104] 
Equally comic, if less detailed in analysis, is Jonson's incorporation of the 
myth of Jove, Danae, and the golden shower in the seduction speeches Mam-
mon delivers to his "great lady," Dol, in 4.1.25-31, 125-28. An alchemical in-
terpretation of this myth is included in Michael Maier's emblem, Aurum pluit, 
dum nascitur Pallas Rhodi, & Sol concumbit veneri from Atalanta Fugiens (fig. 
15).IBThus to the alchemical tradition of ignotum per ignocius, Jonson joins other 
modes of "dark" discourse: mythological allegory, the hieroglyphics of Drugger's 
sign, the Puritan idiolect of the Anabaptist brethren, the impenetrable babble of 
the inspired Dol once the fit of Hugh Broughton's rabbinical knowledge has 
descended on her, Surly's Spanish, and Kastril's language of the quarrel. 19 Jonson, 


--- PAGE 140 ---
Ben Jonson and the Drama of Alchemy 
129 
EM B L! M A XX I I r. 
n~ fier-efts Natttr.e. 
Aurum pluit,dumnil(cicur Pallas Rhodi,&Solconcumbit Veneri. 
E PIG RAM M A XXIII. 
R EscH mira/idem fecit fed Crt£eia nobis 
Ejm,;zpud Rhodio> qUt£ celebratafuit. 
'1\!!bib:u Aureolm,refirum,quod deeidit imber, 
Solubi erat CJprj,ejunc11U ~more De.t: 
Tumqltoqfle,CItm p.zlld-fCerebro Jo'Vis excidifJ,tHrtim 
raft JiO ;!wvi,pc cad.u infl.tr aqll.t. 
Figure 15. Athena's Birth, Jove and Danae. Michael Maier, Atalanta fogiens (1617). By 
permission of the University of Delaware Library, Newark, Delaware. 


--- PAGE 162 ---
Ben Jonson and the Drama of Alchemy 
151 
cury, the alchemist, and Nature end, in both works, with the last pair of pas-
sages quoted. These may also be used to point out their one important thematic 
difference. In Mercury Vindicated. the alchemists are banished forever; Mercury 
announces his future allegiance to King James and Nature only, and alchemy is 
flatly equated with imposture. Jonson refuses to consider the art and its practi-
tioners in any other way. However, as an alchemist himself, Sendivogius is natu-
rally unwilling to go to this extreme. For this reason he has his Nature draw the 
distinction between the foolish and ignorant "alchemist," who is rightfully ban-
ished, and the true alchemical "philosophers" and "wise men," who are placed 
under her benevolent patronage. By her own admission they have the knowl-
edge to help her "whither [she] cannot goe." Sendivogius is thus in full agree-
ment with Michael Maier's familiar Emblema 42 on the necessity of the alchemist's 
following of Nature: In Chymicis versanti Natura, Ratio, Experientia & lectio, sint 
Dux, scipio, perspicilia & tampas (fig. 19).72 
On the basis of these many similarities in form, theme, character and ac-
tion, language, and descriptive detail, I would argue that it is extremely likely 
that Jonson knew Sendivogius's Dialogue and used it as his direct source. In this 
work, Jonson found a fully drawn model that was to serve him extremely well in 
realizing the primary objectives and overall design of his masque. It provided, 
first of all, a pattern for a fanciful and humorous fictive treatment of the themes 
of Nature versus Art and the Decay of Nature that had recently been explored in 
such works as The Winters Tale and Donne's First Anniversary. An Anatomy of the 
World. Inherent in Sendivogius's treatment of these themes was, of course, a 
heavy admixture of satire at the expense of alchemical charlatanism, a subject 
for which Jonson needed no model. Finally, the Dialogue suggested, but did not 
develop, the idea of a courtly setting for the practice of alchemy, and from this, 
in combination with the earlier themes, there followed the masque's encompass-
ing design of courtly compliment. Given this inheritance from a likely source, 
Jonson's greatest challenge was undoubtedly the problem of how to evoke courtly 
compliment from materials that were traditionally allied more to satire than the 
idealizing mode of the masque.73 His solution involved, first of all, recognition 
and utilization of many of the important oppositions that were implicit in the 
philosophical and alchemical materials at hand: e.g., Art/Nature, Vulcan/Mer-
cury, alchemist/philosopher, ignorance/knowledge, fools/princes, torture/libera-
tion, deformity/perfection, Alchymists workehouse/glorious bowre, Prometheus/ 
charlatan, and the devil/Christ. Mter establishing these antitheses, Jonson needed 
only to relate King James to the "honorific" side of the dichotomy as it was 
crystallized in the transformation scene with its triumph of Nature and Mercury 
over Art and Vulcan. Having thus positioned James, having represented him as 
the "Maiesty of this light" who transforms the sooty laboratory into the "glori-
ous bowre," royal compliment and flattery could only result in denigration of 
Art, alchemy, and all of the objects of Jonson's satire. 
Whether Jonson actually drew upon Sendivogius's Dialogue and, if he did, 


--- PAGE 163 ---
152 
Darke Hierogliphicks 
EYBlIMA XLII. De{ecrettsNitUY.t. 
In Chymicis ver(anti N ~tura, R.a~i~,Experientia & Iectio, 
lint Dux'[ciplO,perfplcllta & lampas. 
E PIG RAM M A XLU. 
DUx Naturatibi,f"quearte pediffiqtltuilli 
Eflo lubens,errtts,ni comes ipfo '7.li.uFf. 
Det ratio fcipionis opem, Experien ti.t jirmet 
L ttmina,qIJo pofft cernere pojl a procul. 
Lec1ioJit lamp4f ten-ebris dilucidA.,rermn 
rerbortimquejfrues pro'7.lid;u UfCJV(.l£. 
Figure 19. Alchemist following Nature. Michael Maier, Atalanta fogiens (1617). 
By permission of the University of Delaware Library, Newark, Delaware. 


--- PAGE 192 ---
The Poetry of Donne and Herbert 
181 
out most of the three central stanzas. Alchemical metaphor becomes the chief 
means of intensifying the grief, of showing the destructive effects of a boundless 
love that is fIxed in mortality, and of illustrating the impact that the loss of the 
loved one has on the speaker.59 For these reasons, Donne's employment of al-
chemical concepts is contrary to their function in "The Canonization" and the 
majority of poems recently considered. Rather, alchemy in "Nocturnall" most 
resembles its use in "Twicknam garden," in which love has produced a curious 
"reverse alchemy" in the speaker's life. Entering the garden in search of a 
Paracelsian panacea for his disappointment-"such balmes, as else cure every 
thing"-the speaker notes bitterly: "But 0, selfe tray tor, I do bring / The spider 
love, which transubstantiates all, / And can convert Manna to gall" (ll. 5-7). 
Here the alchemical "transubstantiat[ion]" wrought by the "spider love" in con-
verting life-sustaining "Manna" to bitter "gall" is exactly opposite the positive 
morally and theologically charged process found in "To the Countesse of 
Huntingdon" and The First Anniversary. Donne's highly original use of a kind of 
reverse alchemy as metaphor for the debilitating effects of love in "Twicknam 
garden" and the "Nocturnall" is, however, not without precedent in the writings 
of alchemical and chemical authors. 
In 1678, a brief tract entitled [An Historical Account] of a Degradation of 
Gold Made by an Anti-Elixir: A Strange Chymical Narative (Wing 3984) was 
published in London. Not a serious experimental treatise by Robert Boyle, to 
whom it has been attributed, this rare pamphlet might more accurately be clas-
sifIed as a ludibrium (derision, mockery, or sport), a joke or "comic fIction," as 
exemplifIed by Sendivogius's Dialogue or as Frances Yates has described Michael 
Maier's Lusus serius and focus severus.60 Set at a conference of virtuosi undoubt-
edly modeled on the Royal Society, the tract consists of a report by Pyrophilus 
of an experiment in which a piece of gold is debased or transmuted into a cruder 
metal, a bizarre instance of reverse alchemy produced by an "anti-elixir." In 
Pyrophilus's narrative, the experiment proceeds with all of the accuracy and ob-
jectivity associated with the Royal Society and Robert Boyle, the founder of 
modern chemistry, but at a crucial moment a tiny portion of reddish powder 
(given to Pyrophilus by a mysterious stranger) is added to the two drams of gold 
originally placed in the crucible. When the substance cooled, Pyrophilus reports, 
"I was somewhat surpriz'd to fInd . . . that we had not lost any thing of the 
weight we put in, yet in stead of fine Gold, we had a lump of Metal of a dirty 
colour, and as it were overcast with a thin coat, almost like half vitrified Lith-
arge. "61 This "odd" metal is taken to a goldsmith for testing and found to be far 
less precious than the original gold; its specifIc gravity has been reduced and it 
resembles bell-metal or brass. There seems little doubt that a "reverse" transmu-
tation has been effected through the use of an anti-elixir. However, no less than 
in a conventional projection, where base metals are transmuted into gold, 
Pyrophilus's experiment must be interpreted as a victory of art over nature.62 
Curiously, Boyle's alchemical jest was anticipated many years earlier in Donne's 


--- PAGE 198 ---
The Poetry of Donne and Herbert 
187 
manders are closely related variants of dragons, serpents, and the ouroboros, the 
tail-eating serpent of ancient Egyptian iconography. Within this class of crea-
tures, the dragon is notable for its extreme antiquity and multiplicity of mean-
ing. According to Jung, its documented past dates back to the Codex Marcianus 
of the tenth or eleventh centuries, where it is accompanied by the caption EV TO 
1TClv (the One, the All),73 and its tail-biting pattern traditionally symbolizes the 
circularity of the alchemical process: "Time and again the alchemists reiterate 
that the opus proceeds from the one and leads back to the one, that it is a sort of 
circle like a dragon biting its own tail. For this reason the opus was often called 
circulare (circular) or else rota (the wheel). Mercurius stands at the beginning 
and end of the work: he is the prima materia, the caput corvi, the nigredo; as 
dragon he devours himself and as dragon he dies, to rise again as the lapis. "74 
The association of the salamander with this alchemical meaning is present 
in emblem 29 of Michael Maier's Atalanta Fugiens (fig. 25), which bears the 
motto: "Just as the Salamander, the stone lives in the fire. "75 For Meier, as for 
Patrick Scot in the passage quoted in chapter 1, the salamander thus symbolizes 
the philosopher's stone in that it is made by fire and is also indestructible. There 
are further visual and verbal parallels in the symbolism of the salamander as set 
forth in Lambsprinck's De Lapide Philosophico Libellus (Frankfurt, 1625).76 In 
David Person's Varieties, or, a Surveigh of rare and excellent matters (London, 1635), 
the fifth book is entitled Salamandra, or a short Treatise of the Philosophers Stone, 
and, finally, the link between salamanders, alembics, and their contents is con-
firmed in the following passage from an anonymous eighteenth-century French 
manuscript: "How often did their pleasure in the wonderful discoveries I made 
concerning the abstruse doctrines of the ancients move them to reveal unto my 
eyes and fingers the Hermetic vessel, the salamander, the full moon and the 
rising sun."n As the mercurial spirit, the salamander represents imperishability 
and ultimately regeneration because, although like the ouroboros it can suffer 
death through self-consumption, it is reborn in the form of the philosopher's 
stone. In the context of Donne's satire, man and his desperate courage are mock-
ingly compared to this miraculous creature. 
Closely related to the salamander is Donne's allusion to the "Divine I Chil-
dren in th'oven." In this regard, the link established in Ruland's Lexicon should 
be noted; the entry for "Salamandri or Saldini" begins: "Fiery Men or Spirits, 
Beings sustained by the influence and nourished by the element of fire."78 While 
obviously primary reference is to the presence of Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego in the fiery furnace as told in the third chapter of the book of Daniel, 
this story was at times given an allegorical interpretation by writers on alchemy.79 
The relation of this story of the three Jewish youths to Donne's third satire 
is unquestionably on the moral and narrative, rather than the alchemical, level. 
He is not using the narrative for any symbolic or allegorical signification that 
has to do with alchemy per se, but he is mocking the arrogance that causes man 
to assume that he possesses the same protection from death and disaster that 


--- PAGE 199 ---
188 
Darke Hierogliphicks 
EMBLEMA XXIX. 
Defe(rttisJ.t~fur.l. 
Ut Salamandra vivitigne fie lapis: 
E PIG RAM M A 
XXI~. 
D Egitinard(lIliSalamandr4p~tmti()rign0; 
~( Vule ane t 114S £flima t ilIa minas: 
Sir quoque non jlllmmamm inundia j:ev.t r(mfa!, 
!i2!!if"it ajJidtto nlltus in igne L~pu. 
lUa "gens.tjltU extingllit,liberdqtte exil, 
c.Atcakt hic,jimilif qllemcalor illd( jlmaf. 
Figure 25. Salamander. Michael Maier, Atalanta fogiens (1617). By permission of the 
Universiry of Delaware Library, Newark, Delaware. 


--- PAGE 215 ---
204 
Darke Hierogliphicks 
sages such as this come to be repeated with increasing frequency during the middle 
decades of the seventeenth century. 
In its combining of Hermetic and Judeo-Christian teachings with much 
familiar detail from Renaissance cosmology and natural philosophy, Tymme's 
Dialogue is quite typically Elizabethan. Its most unusual feature is the heavy 
emphasis given to the three principles theory, which provides the basis for much 
ofTymme's speculation and analysis. The fact that this theory is traced to Hermes 
rather than Paracelsus suggests the veneration in which the ancient authority 
was held, even two years before the correct dating of his writings by Isaac 
Casaubon in 1614, and the eagerness of Renaissance authors to enlist his sup-
port rather than that of more recent authorities.29 As Tymme was a minister, as 
well as the author and translator of numerous religious and philosophical trea-
tises,30 the Dialogue Philosophical! also serves as evidence of the degree to which 
Hermetic and Paracelsian ideas were assimilated by Renaissance writers who were 
not primarily in the occult tradition. 
Although the 1620s saw no great outpouring of alchemical books, those 
that were published tended to emphasize the art's philosophical and spiritual 
aspects much more than its traditional concerns with transmutation and 
iatrochemistry. For this reason, publication of works by Giovanni Lambye, Patrick 
Scot, and the shadowy Nicholas Flamel helped to provide both pattern and con-
text for literary allusions marked by boldness of metaphor, mystical overtones, 
allegorical style, and, above all, a combination of alchemical image and Chris-
tian subject, theme, and doctrine. The first and least important work in this 
group, A Revelation o/the Secret Spirit by John Baptista Lambye (Giovanni Lambi, 
a Venetian), was translated from the Latin original and Italian commentary by 
one "R.N.E. Gentleman" and published in 1623.31 In his Epistle Dedicatory, 
the translator refers to the treatise as a "Philosophicall Apocalypse" that can be 
explicated only by one of such singular learning as the dedicatee, John 
Thornburgh, Lord Bishop of Worcester. An alchemized mythography of Atalanta 
(alchemy) and Hippomenes (a would-be adept) is included at the beginning of 
the dedication to demonstrate that "the dangerous course of Alchymie in many 
is manifestly seene, that who doth not overcome it, perisheth; and whosoever is 
to overcome it, must first receive three golden apples from venus. "32 Five years 
earlier, Michael Maier had utilized the same mythography in the title and en-
graved title page of his most famous work, the Atalanta Fugiens (1618). Within 
the treatise proper, Lambye quickly turns to description and explication of his 
main subject, the World Soul. This dominant force in both macrocosm and 
microcosm is "the Spirit of the Quintessence," which Lambye figures forth as 
the agent of all natural and salutary effects. It is, variously, the "upholder of 
Heaven," "retainer of Earth," "container of all things and vertues," the remover 
of all evil, and the curer of all diseases. Citing Avicenna, Lambye states that this 
spirit "is called the soule of the worlde, because as the soule moveth the mem-
bers, so this Spirit moveth all bodies; and as the soule is in every part of the 


--- PAGE 259 ---
248 
Torn from Pelorus, or the shatter'd side 
Of thund'ring"'£tna, whose combustible 
And fuell'd entrails thence conceiving Fire, 
Sublim'd with Mineral fury, aid the Winds, 
And leave a singed bottom all involv'd 
With stench and smoke: [1:230-37] 
Darke Hierogliphicks 
Milton's prototype of a nuclear firestorm, the result of violent winds and intense 
heat escaping from within the subterranean vault, is solidly grounded in Renais-
sance theories concerning these natural phenomena.l5 And while his "Sublim'd 
with Mineral fury" is extremely effective in rendering this holocaust of heat and 
wind, even suggesting hell's sulphurous stench, its sublimation offers no possibil-
ity of refining and purification. The traditional aims of this alchemical process 
have no place in the abode of one who is beyond hope and redemption. Also 
learnedly accurate, as Duncan has shown,76 is the reference later in book 1 to the 
subterranean growth of metals. The fallen angels' search for materials with which 
to build Pandaemonium takes them to the hill where the "parent" principle of 
sulphur has been operative: 
There stood a Hill not far whose grisly top 
Belch'd fire and rolling smoke; the rest entire 
Shone with a glossy scurf, undoubted sign 
That in his womb was hid metallic Ore, 
The work of Sulphur. [1. 670-74] 
The description recalls the illustration from Michael Maier's Symbola aurea! Mensa! 
of the mountain within which the vaporous exhalations of sulphur and mercury 
are producing ore, just as it is being produced alchemically on the mountaintop 
(fig. 4). 
But much more original than this traditional view of metallic generation is 
Milton's reference to alchemy as a metal in 2:516-17, the first such use that I 
have found in a purely literary context. Here, following closure of the Stygian 
council, four cherubim-heralds blazon forth the results with infernal trumpets, 
"Put[ting] to thir mouths the sounding Alchymy." Duncan, citing earlier editors 
and the OED, has suggested two related lines of explanation. "Alchymy" appears 
at times in the Renaissance to designate an artifical, counterfeit or "mixed metal," 
an alloy of the sort used in the production of bells; hence it was referred to as 
"bell metal." Second, Milton's usage is metonymic; he is naming "the efficient 
for the effect."77 Such explanations, however, fail to address the most important 
aspect of Milton's image: the sound of the "sounding Alchymy" and its effects. 
The linking of the sound of angelic trumpets with alchemy suggests the concept 
of "musical gold" and the role that music, based on Pythagorean concepts of 
harmony and proportion, played in alchemical ritual and process.7B Henry 
Cornelius Agrippa, for example, notes the useful by-products that have resulted 


--- PAGE 260 ---
Alchemy in the Poetry o/Vaughan and Milton 
249 
from alchemical experimentation: "I do not denie that of this Arte many most 
excellente workemanshippes had theire beginninge. From hence come the tem-
peratures of Asure, of Cinnaber, of Sinople, of Purple, and of that which they call 
musicall golde, and of other Coloures. "79 Some alchemists were also composers 
of music that was intimately related to their art, such as the Cantilena of George 
Ripley, which have survived in many Latin and English versions,80 and as Tho-
mas Norton, the other famous late medieval alchemist, wrote in 1477: "Joyne 
them together also Arithmetically, By suttil Numbers proportionally . . . Joyne 
your Elements Musically."81 However, the best-known pairing of music and al-
chemy is Michael Maier's Atalanta Fugiem (Oppenheim, 1618), in which each of 
the fifty engraved illustrations is accompanied by an epigram and a fugue, com-
plete with musical notation and words. 
But beyond these matters of background, the appropriateness of this un-
usual use of ''Alchymy'' in its immediate c.ontext has not been discussed. The 
effects of the notes played by the angelic trumpeters are immediate and large in 
scope, producing a dramatically significant change in Satan's fallen legions: 
the hollow Abyss 
Heard far and wide, and all the host of Hell 
With deaf'ning shout, return'd them loud acclaim. 
Thence more at ease thir minds and somewhat rais'd 
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers 
Disband, and wand'ring, each his several way 
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice 
Leads him perplext [2:518-25] 
While Milton intends the scene to be recognized as an infernal parody of the 
chorusing of heavenly angels, his masterstroke of irony is the momentary lifting 
of the demons' anxious minds by the "false presumptuous hope" inspired by the 
trumpets' "sounding Alchymy." Like the traditional victims of alchemical hoaxes 
they depart in sad confusion, a point that resonates in the twice-repeated "in 
vain" in the next alchemical image in 3:601-2. 
For Milton, the primary association of alchemy is fundamental change, 
whether of the kind exhibited in the demeanor of the fallen angels upon hearing 
the heralds' "sounding Alchymy" or in the extended discussion of ontology and 
the operations of nature in book 5, to be discussed shortly. However, the passing 
of Satan through the shell of the universe in book 3, followed by his descent to 
the sun's surface, provides occasion for the epic's most spectacular alchemical al-
lusion. In this universe, the sun is obviously the source and provider of the life 
force. In phrases that recall hermetic images of the dove brooding over the pri-
mordial waters at the time of the Creation, Milton also emphasizes the sun's im-
pregnation of the universe with fructifying virtue; its "Magnetic beam" "gently 
warms / The Universe, and to each inward part / With gentle penetration, though 
unseen, / Shoots invisible virtue even to the deep:" (3:583-86). In accordance 


--- PAGE 322 ---
Notes to Pages 87-93 
311 
40. "The Stone of the Philosophers: Embracing The First Matter and the Dual Process 
for the Vegetable and Metallic Tinctures," in Collectanea Chemica: Being Certain Select Treatises 
on Alchemy and Hermetic Medicine (London: James Elliott, 1893), 116. This anthology of 
alchemical tracts is a reprinting of some, but not all, of those included in a collection of the 
same name printed in 1684 by Wliliam Cooper. 
41. The WOrks of Gabriel Harvey, D.eL., ed. Alexander B. Grosart, 3 vols. (London: 
Huth Library, 1884),2:250-51. All references to Harvey's writings are to this edition, hereaf-
ter cited as WOrks. 
42. Kelley's exploits are alluded to in Jonson's Alchemist, 4.1, and in canto 3 of Hudibras. 
Also in Pierces Supererogation, Harvey invokes Kelley for the purpose of ridiculing Nashe: "I 
wondred to heare, that Kelly had gotten the Golden Fliece [Le., the philosopher's stone]' and 
by vertue thereof was sodenly advaunced into so honorable reputation with the Emperours 
maiestye; but would have woondred more, to have seene a woorke of Supererogation from 
Nashe: whose witt must not enter the listes of comparison with Kelleyes Alchimy" (Harvey, 
WOrks, 2:68-69). 
43. The details of Kelley's life are recounted in Holmyard, Alchemy, 204-9; see also the 
article in the DNB. 
44. References to musical gold occur infrequently in literary treatments of alchemy. Nashe's 
mention of it in Christ's Team, 2: 185 (and numerous other obscure allusions to alchemy through-
out his writings) suggest, I think, that he possessed a far more detailed knowledge than most of 
his contemporaries. According to Read, the connection between alchemy and music is derived 
from the Pythagorean idea of harmonious correspondences between the notes of the musical 
scale and the extension of this idea to the music of the spheres. Read also mentions musical 
compositions that accompanied early ceremonies and rituals in magic and necromancy; see 
Through Alchemy to Chemistry, 68-73. The primary example of the use of musical notation in 
an alchemical treatise/emblem book is the Atalanta Fugiem of Michael Maier, published in 
Oppenheim in 1617. 
45. Nashe refers to the Discoverie in Terrors of the Night, (1:309,351). For discussion of 
the influence of Erasmus, Scot, and other writers on Nashe, see McKerrow, "Nashe's Read-
ing," (5:110-36). 
46. I agree with McKerrow's general assessment that "Among modern authors the most 
surprising amount of borrowing is from De Incertitudine et Vanitate Scientiarum of Cornelius 
Agrippa, to which Nashe appears to be indebted more than seventy times-and some of the 
borrowings are passages of several lines in length, containing a number of distinct facts. It is 
hardly too much to say that the greater part ofNashe's apparent learning is transferred whole-
sale from Agrippa's work" (5:134-35). 
47. Henrie Cornelius Agrippa, of the Vanitie and uncertaintie of Artes and Sciences, Englished 
byJa[mes] San[dford] Gent. (London, 1569), 157. 
48. The Complete WOrks of John Iyly, ed. R. Warwick Bond, 3 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1902),3:402. 
49. The Non-Dramatic WOrks of Thomas Dekker, ed. Alexander B. Grosart, 5 vols. (lon-
don: Huth Library, 1884-86),3:286-90. All references to Dekker's writings are to this edition. 
50. Ashmole, TCB, 455. 
51. References are to The Poems of Sir Philip Sidney, ed. Wliliam A. Ringler, Jr. (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1%2). 
52. All references to Shakespeare's sonnets and plays are to The Riverside Shakespeare, ed. 
G. Blakemore Evans et al. (Boston: Houghton MifHin, 1974). 
53. The Poetical WOrks of Edmund Spemer, ed. J.e. Smith and E. de Selincourt (London: 
Oxford Univ. Press, 1950), 403. 


--- PAGE 328 ---
Notes to Pages 125-128 
317 
made mee out of love with a good sense" (8:620); "the chiefe vertue of a style is perspicuitie, 
and nothing [is] so vitious in it, as to need an Interpreter" (8:622). 
13. Discoveries, 8:627; in this passage Jonson is consciously evoking book 1 of the Ad-
vancement of Learning. On Jonson's detestation of imposture, see also the section entitled 
Impostorum focus (8:570). 
14. See, for example, Subtle's specious fears that his efforts in behalf of Mammon will 
come to naught because of the knight's suspected immorality: his own thoughts, he tells Mam-
mon, have "look'd no way, but unto publique good, I To pious uses, and deere charitie" (2.3.16-
17). Watson, in Ben lomon's Parodic Strategy. suggests reasonably that Mammon, on certain 
occasions as at 2.3.49-52, adopts the role of "public benefactor" in order to disguise his base 
motives from the supposedly pious Subtle (120-21). 
15. On the question of the dates of the Hollands, see Herford and Simpson's note, Ben 
lomon, 10:63. 
16. The major recent study of Dee is Nicholas H. Clulee, lohn Dee's Natural Philosophy 
(London and New York: Routledge, 1988). See also Peter French, lohn Dee: The World of an 
Elizabethan Magus (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972). Despite Dee's appearance in 
Subtle's rebus, it is too much to claim, as several scholars have done, that Dee is the charlatan's 
original, a view that goes back as far as Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle's The De-
scription of the World (1668); for the relevant passage, see Ben lomon, 10:47. For one example 
of the perpetuation of this tradition, see Frances A. Yates, The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabe-
than Age (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979), 161. 
17. On Jonson's adaptation from his source, Chtysogonus Polydorus's preface to the col-
lection De Alchemia, published at Nuremberg in 1541 and 1545, see Supriya Chaudhuri, "Jason's 
Fleece: The Source of Sir Epicure Mammon's Allegoty," RES, n.s., 35 (1984): 71-73. See also 
the notes accompanying this passage in Ben lomon, vol. 10, and Duncan, "Jonson's Alchemist 
and the Literature of Alchemy," 702-5. 
18. The epigram reads in part, "It is a wonderful stoty ... I They say that a gold rain 
descended from the clouds, I When Sol was united in love with the Cyprian goddess: I May 
then also, when Pallas breaks out of Jupiter's head, I The gold descend into the retort destined 
to it, like a rainshower," as translated in H.M.E. De Jong, Michael Maier's Atalanta Fugiem: 
Sources of an Alchemical Book of Emblems (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1969), 181. Maier includes al-
chemical emblems of several other myths of the sort that Jonson mentions here, e.g., Ceres 
(411), Mercuty and Venus (414), and Oedipus (415). 
19. The existence of such linguistic modes has been noted by several critics, including 
Anne Barton, in Ben lomon, Dramatist, 149, and, most recently, Chetyl Lynn Ross, "The 
Plague of The Alchemist," &naissance Quarterly 41:3 (autumn 1988): 454-57, who sees them 
as symptomatic of the play's tendencies toward colonization. On the "inflationary" and "awe-
producing" qualities in the language of alchemy, see Wayne A. Rebhorn, "Jonson's 'Jovy Boy': 
Lovewit and the Dupes in The Alchemist," lEGP79 (1980): 361-64. 
20. On Jonson's essentially conservative cast of mind, see Alvin B. Kernan, "Alchemy and 
Acting: The Major Plays of Ben Jonson," Studies in the Literary Imagination 6 (April 1973): 5-
6. There is critical disagreement as to whether the explosion and the failed experiment that 
precipitates it are, in fact, "real" in the play. R.L. Smallwood sees Subtle's laboratory as existing 
only in the rhetoric of the charlatans and from thence in the imaginations of the dupes and 
audience; it is part of the play's pervasive deceptio visus, "created through pretence, through 
theatrical art, above all through the art of language" (,"Here, in the Friars': Immediacy and 
Theatricality in The Alchemist," RES, n.s., 32 [1981]: 154). On the other hand, Anne Barton, 
on the basis of Lovewit's description of smoky walls, a furnace, and broken utensils (5.5.38-
42), states that "it becomes plain that Mammon, Tribulation and the rest are not the only ones 


--- PAGE 331 ---
320 
Notes to Pages 136-140 
45. Thorndike, HMES, 7:158. In footnote 25 on this page, Thorndike states that two 
other early editions of the Novum Lumen, printed in Frankfurt (1606) and Cologne (1610), 
are listed in Carl C. Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie (Halle, 1832). 
46. Thorndike, HMES, 7:158-59. 
47. Thorndike, HMES, 7:155. 
48. Read, Humour and Humanism in Chemistry, 62. 
49. Ferguson, Bibliotheca Chemica, 2:365. 
50. Thorndike, HMES, 7:159 n. 29. 
51. Ferguson, Bibliotheca Chemica, 2:369. Ferguson states that Sendivogius "is consid-
ered to have written: Tractatus de Sulphure; Dialogus Mercurii, Alchymist£ et Natur£; Aenigma 
philosophicum. These, which appear sometimes separately, are usually all printed together." 
52. Theatrum Chemicum, Praecipuos Selectorum Auctorum Tractatus de Chemiae (Strasburg, 
1613),4:509-17. 
53. John W. Shirley, "The Scientific Experiments of Sir Walter Ralegh, the Wizard Earl, 
and the Three Magi in the Tower, 1603-17," Ambix 4 (Dec. 1949): 66. 
54. See figura 27 in this edition. 
55. The WOrks of Sir Thomas Browne, ed. Geoffrey Keynes, 4 vols. (Chicago: Univ. of 
Chicago Press, 1964),2:106. 
56. George Thor, Cheiragogia Heliana. A Manuduction to the Philosopher's Magical Gold 
(London, 1659), 29. 
57. From the translation of Helvetius's Golden Calf included in William Cooper, The 
Philosophical Epitaph ofW.e. Esquire, 37. 
58. Houpreght, Aurifontina Chymica, sig. A3Y. 
59. Mystagogus, Mercury's Caducean Rod, 70. 
60. See entry 338 in my William Cooper's A Catalogue ofChymical1 Books. 
61. Francis A. Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1972), 31, 50, 84. Although rare, brief and humorously allegorical alchemical tracts of the 
Dialogue type appear occasionally from the Middle Ages through the seventeenth century. In 
addition to the few examples cited by Yates, see Jean de Meun's A Demonstration of Nature, 
made to the Erring Alchemists in Waite, Hermetic Museum, 1:121-41, which has important 
thematic and srylistic resemblances to both Sendivogius's Dialogue and Mercury Vindicated. 
See also Michael Maier's A Subtle Allegory Concerning the Secrets of Alchemy in the Hermetic 
Museum, 2: 199-223; [An Historical Account] of a Degradation of Gold Made by an Anti-Elixir 
(London, 1678), by Robert Boyle; and Johann Joachim Becher's Magnalia Naturae (London, 
1680). 
62. All of the following quotations are taken from this edition. 
63. See, for example, Thomas Tymme's A Dialogue Philosophicall (London, 1612) and 
Michael Maier's Lusus Serius (London, 1654). Thorndike cites other alchemical dialogues in 
HMES, 5:545; 7:166, 173, and the genre is discussed in Robert P. Multhauf, "Some Non-
existent Chemists of the Seventeenth Century: Remarks on the Use of the Dialogue in Scien-
tific Writing," in Alchemy and Chemistry in the Seventeenth Century: Papers Read by Allen G. 
Debus and Robert P. Multhauf at a Clark Library Seminar, March 12, 1966 (Los Angeles: Will-
iam Andrews Clark Memorial Library, 1966),31-50. 
64. See the section "Of Sulphur" in the previously cited edition of 1650, pp. 126-42. 
This treatise is a close counterpart of the Mercury dialogue and takes the form of an exchange 
between a foolish alchemist, who is unable to reach a "conclusion," and a voice representing 
Saturn. 
65. Duncan, "The Alchemy in Jonson's Mercury Vindicated," 629-30. 


--- PAGE 332 ---
Notes to Pages 142-151 
321 
66. This passage reveals Jonson's familiarity with the terminology and physical processes 
of the art as well as his skill in rendering its modes of thought and metaphorical idiom. "Crude" 
and "Sublimate," for example, refer to the common, material substance (quicksilver, in this 
case) and to the specially prepared "sophic" mercuty, one of the proximate principles of the 
stone. The "male" and "female" and "hermaphroditic" qualities might refer either to the con-
junction of opposites-king and queen, brother and sister, sol and luna, sulphur and mercury, 
etc.-that was a crucial stage in the alchemical process or to the bisexual principles inherent in 
mercury alone. The complexity of the alchemists' conception of mercury is summarized in 
Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, trans. R.EG Hull, 2d ed. {New York: Princeton Univ. Press, 
1953),292-93,295. 
67. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, 65-6. 
68. Orgel has stated that "Court masques were always topical; under Charles I they ar-
gued the royal case in current political and legal disputes with an energy and ingenuity that 
suggests that the king must have been actively involved in their composition" (Illusion of Power, 
43). Further, in noting the commonness of magician-monarch figures in Jacobean masques, 
Brooks-Davies states that "clearly, James's hatred of witchcraft and the black arts was no hin-
drance to the resurgence of the cult of the monarch magus in his reign" (Mercurian Monarch, 
87). The strength of James's feelings against witchcraft is reflected not only in its most famous 
expression, the Demonology of 1597, but also in the Basilicon Doron, where he states that "there 
[are] some horrible crimes that ye are bound in conscience never to forgive: suche as Witch-
craft, wilfull murther, Incest (especiallie within the degrees of consanguinitie) Sodomy, 
Poysoning, and false coine" (The Basilicon Doron of King James VI, ed. James Craigie, 2 vols. 
[Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood, 1944, 1950], 1:65). 
69. C£ II. 23, 37, 192, and especially 45-51: "Howsoever they may pretend under the 
specious names of Geber, Arnold, Lully, Bombast ofHohenhein [Paracelsus], to commit miracles 
in art, and treason again' nature. And, as if the title of Philosopher, that creature of glory, were 
to be fetch'd out of a furnace, abuse the curious and credulous Nation of metall-men through 
the world, and make Mercury their instrument." 
70. Duncan, "The Alchemy in Jonson's Mercury Vindicated." 637. 
71. This reference to the number twelve marks a further similarity in the two works. In 
Sendivogius, Nature says that she has many sons, but of these, seven-those who correspond 
to the seven metals-are set apart, and of these Mercury is first (Dialogue, 73). There are also 
comparable references to Nature's daughters near the end of each work: Sendivogius's Nature 
notes that she has "many Sonnes, and many Daughters" (Dialogue, 73), while in Jonson, 
Prometheus's song following the first dance poses the question: "How many, 'mongst these 
Ladies here, I Wish now they such a mother were!"; Nature responds: "Not one, I feare, I And 
read it in their laughters. I There's more, I guesse, would wish to be my daughters" (II. 226-
30). 
72. De Jong's translation, in Michael Maier's Atalanta Fugiens, of the motto reads: "May 
Nature, Reason, Exercise and Literature be the guide, staff. spectacles and lamp for him who 
participates in chemistry" (266). 
73. Orgel has noted the antithetical spirit of the masque and satire: "The masque pre-
sents the triumph of an aristocratic community; at its center is a belief in the hierarchy and a 
faith in the power of idealization. . . . As a genre, it is the opposite of satire; it educates by 
praising, by creating heroic roles for the leaders of society to fill" (The Illusion of Power, 40). 


--- PAGE 337 ---
326 
Notes to Pages 183-191 
which the speaker has been "expressed" (pressed or squeezed) is "the erotic relationship that 
his beloved's death has since taught the speaker was not what he thought it was"; however, I 
think the poem is more an expression of the speaker's grief over the beloved's death than a 
remorseful self-condemnation for participating in an erotic relationship with her. See "Prepar-
ing Towards Lucy: 'A NocturnalI' as Palinode," SP 84 (1987): 489-90. 
66. Duncan, "Donne's Alchemical Figures," 280. 
67. Alchemical possibilities in ''The Extasie" have been studied in two recent articles: 
Julia M. Walker, "John Donne's 'The Extasie' as an Alchemical Process," English Language 
Notes 20: 1 (September 1982), 1-8; and Abraham, "'The Lovers and the Tomb,'" 311-18. See 
also Nicholl, The Chemical Theatre, 119-35, for brief discussion of "The Extasie" and a few 
other of the Songs and Sonets. 
68. Ruland, Lexicon of Alchemy, 303. See also Shawcross, Complete Poetry, 117 n. 13. 
69. Quoted by Grierson in Poems, 2:29. The following passage from George Ripley's 
Marrow of Alchemy illustrates what Donne has in mind in the lines from "A Valediction of the 
booke": "See what the Scripture saith, He stroke the Stone, and water flowed out, and he brought 
forth oyl out of the Flinty rock. We may note the whole composition of the Elixir in these four 
verses following. He stretcheth forth the Heavens as a Curtain. The ~ter stood above the Moun-
tains: This is the Water which does cover Our Matter, and performs the dissolution thereof, 
causing a cloudy Ascension. That does walk upon the Wings of the Wind. This figures forth the 
sublimation of our Stone" (from the Medulla Alchymiae, The Marrow of Alchemy, Written in 
Latin by George Ripley, Canon ofBridlington . .. Translated into English, ... by William Salmon 
(London, 1692),664-65. Hereafter cited as Ripley). 
70. Holmyard, Alchemy, 48. 
71. Mazzeo, in "Donne's Alchemical Imagery," notes the populariry of alembic images in 
Donne's poetry; several of my examples receive some discussion in his essay and in Duncan, 
"Donne's Alchemical Figures." 
72. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, 236-38. See also H.J. Sheppard, "Egg Symbolism in 
Alchemy," Ambix 6 (August 1958): 140-48. 
73. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, 293. 
74. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, 293. 
75. Translated in De Jong, Michael Maier's Atalanta Fugiens, 214. 
76. These have been noted in De Jong, Michael Maier's Atalanta Fugiens, 217, 449. 
77. Jung, Psychology and Alchemy, 276. 
78. Ruland, Lexicon of Alchemy, 279. 
79. For example, after recounting the casting of the three youths into the furnace, Jung 
states "King Nebuchadnezzar had a vision of a fourth, 'like the Son of God,' as we are told in 
Daniel 3:25. This vision is not without bearing on alchemy, since there are numerous passages 
in the literature stating that the stone is trinus et unus. It consists of the four elements, with fire 
representing the spirit concealed in matter. This is the fourth, absent and yet present, who 
always appears in the fiery agony of the furnace and symbolizes the divine presence-succour 
and the completion of the work" (Psychology and Alchemy, 346-47). 
80. See Raymond-Jean Frontain, "Donne's Imperfect Resurrection," PLL 26:4 (fall 1990), 
539-45. 
81. All references to Herbert's poems are to The Works of George Herbert, ed. EE. 
Hutchinson (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964). 
82. See figures 98 and 178 in Jung, Psychology and Alchemy. 
83. Ashmole, TCB, opposite 13; see also the illustration from Salomon Trismosin's 
Splendour Solis, reproduced in Jung as figure 166. 


--- PAGE 356 ---
Bibliography 
345 
Ashmole, Elias. The ~y to Bliss. London, 1658. 
Becher, Johann Joachim. Magnalia Naturae: or, the Philosophers-stone IatelJ expos'd to public 
sight and sale. London, 1680. 
Biggs, Noah. MataeotechniaMedicinae Praxeus. The Wtnity of the CraftofPhysick. London, 
1651. 
Boehme, Jacob. Forty Questions of the Soul . .. Englished by John Sparrow. London, 1665. 
Boehme, Jacob. Signatura rerum. Translated by John Ellistone. London, 1651. 
Bonus, Petrus. Pretiosa margarita novella. Venice, 1546. 
Bostocke, R. The Difference betwene the Auncient Phisick ... and the latter Phisicke. Lon-
don, 1585. 
Boyle, Robert. [An Historical Account] of a Degradation of Gold Made by an Anti-Elixir. 
London, 1678. 
Boyle, Robert. The Sceptical Chymist by the Hon. Robert Boyle. With an introduction by 
M.M. Pattison Muir. London: J.M. Dent, n.d. 
Braunschweig, Hieronymus. Liber de arte Distillandi de Compositis. Strassburg, 1512. 
Carpenter, Agricola. Pseuchographia Anthropomagica: or, A Magicall Description of the SouL 
London, 1652. 
Casaubon, Meric. A Treatise concerning Enthusiasme, As it is an Effect of Nature: but is 
mistaken by many for either Divine Inspiration, or Diabolical Possession. London, 1654. 
Casaubon, Mmc. A True and Faithful Relation of What passed for many Yeers Between Dr. 
John Dee . .. and Some Spirits. London, 1659. 
Castle, George. The Chymical Galenist: A Treatise Wherein The Practise of the Ancients is 
reconcil'd to the new Discoveries in the Theory of Physick. London, 1667. 
Charleton, Walter. The Immortality of the Human Sou~ Demonstrated by the Light of Na-
ture. London, 1657. 
Cooper, William. The Philosophical Epitaph of we Esquire, for a Memento Mori on his 
Tomb-stone. London, 1673. 
Crollius, Oswald. Philosophy Reformed 6- Improved in Four Profound Tractates . . . Both 
made English by H Pinnell. London, 1657. 
Dee, Arthur. Fasciculus Chemicus: or Chymical Collections. London, 1650. 
De Jong, H.M.E. Michael Maier's Atalanta Fugiens: Sources of an Alchemical Book of Em-
blems. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1969. 
Digby, Sir Kenelm. A Late Discourse . .. Touching the Cure of Wounds by the Powder of 
Sympathy. London, 1658. 
Duchesne, Joseph. [Quersetanus]. The Practise ofChymical4 and Hermetical Physicke, for 
the preservation of health . ... Translated into English by Thomas Timme, Minister. Lon-
don, 1605. 
Espagnet, Jean d'. Enchyridion Physicae Restitutae, or Summary of Physicks' Recovery. [Trans-
lated by Dr. Johann Everard]. London, 1651. 
Flamel, Nicolas. Le livre des figures hieroglJfiques de Nicolas FlameL Paris, 1612. 
Flamel, Nicolas. Nicolas FlameL' His Exposition of the HieroglyphicallFigures (1624). Edited 
by Laurinda Dixon. English Renaissance Hermeticism. New York and London: Gar-
land Publishing, 1994. 
Fludd, Robert. Mosaicall Philosophy: Grounded upon the Essentiall Truth or Eternal Sapi-
ence. London, 1659. 
Fludd, Robert. Utriusque cosmi maioris scilicet et minoris metaphysica, physica atque technica 
historia. 2 vols. Oppenheim, 1617, 1619. 


--- PAGE 357 ---
346 
Bibliography 
French, John. The Art of Distillation. London, 1651. 
Glanvill, Joseph. Philosophia Pia; or A Discourse, of the Religious Temper, and Tendencies of 
the Experimental Philosophy. London, 1671. 
Glanvill, Joseph. Plus Ultra: Or, The Progress and Advancement of Knowledge Since the Days 
of Aristotle. London, 1668. 
Glauber, John Rudolph. The WOrks of the Highly Experienced and Famous Chymist, John 
Rudolph Glauber . .. Translated into English by Christopher Packe. London, 1689. 
Hall, Thomas. Histrio-Mastix. A Whip for webster (as 'tis conceived) the Quondom Player: 
Or, An examination of one John websters delusive Examen of Academies. London, 1654. 
Hall, Thomas. Vindiciae Literarum, The Schools Guarded. London, 1654. 
Harris, Walter. Pharmacologia Anti-Empirica: or a Rational Discourse of Remedies Both 
Chymical and Galenical London, 1683. 
Hartlib, Samuel. Chymical Medicinal and Chyrurgical Addresses, made to Samuel Hartlib, 
Esquire. London, 1655. 
Helvetius. A Briefe of the Golden Calfe. In William Cooper, The Philosophical Epitaph of 
w.e Esquire, for a Memento Mori on his Tomb-stone. London, 1673. 
Hermes Trismegistus. The Divine Pymander of Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, in XVII 
Books. Translated . .. By that Learned Divine Doctor Everard. London, 1650. 
Hermes Trismegistus. Hermetica: The Ancient Greek and Latin Writings Which Contain 
Religious or Philosophic Teachings Ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus. Edited and translated 
by Walter Scott. 4 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1924-36. Reprint, Boston: Shambhala, 
1985. 
Hermes Trismegistus. Hermetica: The Greek "Corpus Hermeticum" and the Latin "Asclepius" 
in a new English translation. Edited and translated by Brian P. Copenhaver. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992. 
Hermes Trismegistus. The Smaragdine Table of Hermes Trismegistus of Alchimy. In The Mir-
ror of Alchimy. 
The Hermetic Museum, Restored and Enlarged. Edited by Arthur Edward Waite. 2 vols. 
London: James Elliot and Co., 1893. 
Heydon, John. The Wise-Mans Crown, or, the Glory of the Rosie Cross. London, 1664. 
Hortulanus. A briefe Commentarie of Hortulanus the Philosopher upon the Smaragdine Table. 
In The MirrorofAlchimy Composed by the Thrice-Famous andLearnedFryer, Roger Bachon. 
London, 1597. 
Houpreght, John Frederick. Aurifontina Chymica: or, A Collection of Fourteen smaU Trea-
tises concerning the First Matter of Philosophers. London, 1680. 
Hydropyrographum Hermeticum. In Houpreght, Aurifontina Chymica. 
Khunrath, Heinrich. Amphitheatrum sapientitt. Hanover, 1609. 
Kircher, Athanasius. Oedipus /Egyptiacus: Hoc est Universalis Hieroglyphictt ~terum. 3 vols. 
Rome, 1652-54. 
Lambye [Lambi], John Baptista. A Revelation of the Secret Spirit. London, 1623. 
Libavius, Andreas. Alchymia. Frankfurt, 1606. 
Maier, Michael. Atalantafogiens. Oppenheim, 1617. 
Maier, Michael. Lusus Serius: or, serious passe-time. London, 1654. 
Maier, Michael. A Subtle Allegory Concerning the Secrets of Alchemy. In The Hermetic Mu-
seum. 2:199-223. 
Maier, Michael. Symbola aurett Menstt. Frankfurt, 1617. 
Maier, Michael. Tripus aureus. Frankfurt, 1618. 


--- PAGE 373 ---
362 
"Alchemy" (Erasmus), 73, 76-81 
Alchimia Opuscula, 41-42 
Alchymia (Libavius), 176, 178 
Alciati,65 
alembics, 58, 185-86, 187, 189,200 
Alexander the Great, 20, 59,60,61 
Alexandria, 14, 15 
Allen, D.C., 233 
All's Well that Ends We// (Shakespeare), 95, 312 
n65 
Amintas and Faustus (Barclay), 67-68 
Amphitheatrum sapienti£ (Khunrath), 8 
"Anatomie of Alchymie" (Lodge), 97-98 
Anatomy of Melancholy (Burton), 261 
Anatomy of the World (Donne), 169, 170-71 
Andreae, Johann Valentin, 139 
Ane Satyre of the thrie £Staits (Lindsay), 68, 70, 
72 
Anima MagicaAbscondita (T. Vaughan), 233, 
333 n 36, 333-34 n 42 
animism,23-24, Ill, 169 
Anniversaries (Donne), 166, 169, 170,324 n 36 
Anselm, Archbishop, 231 
Anthroposophus (T. Vaughan), 283 
Antony and Cleopatra (Shakespeare), 101 
Apology for Smectymnuus (Milton), 247 
Appollonius, 291 
Aquinas, 38 
Arabia, 39, 42, 52, 264; development of 
alchemy in, 14-16,38,300 n 22,304 n 5 
Area areani (Grasseus), 176 
Arehidoxes, 215 
Areopagitica (Milton), 247 
Aristotle, 8, 13,40,207,304 n 4; alchemical 
works attributed to, 38, 39,42; and 
Alexander the Great, 59, 60, 61; disparage-
ment of, 199, 203; four elements theory of, 
15, 17,34; Hall's support of, 274; and 
primary opposition, 19; and Secreta 
Secretorum, 59, 60; Webster's opposition to, 
270,271, 272, 275, 341 n 32 
Arnald of Villanova, 38,41,42,56,273,308 n 
57; alchemical authority of, 40,50,271 
Artephius, 38, 78 
Art of Distillation (French), 27,198-99,202, 
218 
"Art of Learning" (Erasmus), 73-74 
Asch Mezareph (Abraham), 208 
Asclepius, 230, 235, 332 n 25 
Ashmole, Elias, 91, 302 n 58, 341 n 34; 
alchemy viewed by, 19,26,27,56,198; and 
Chaucer, 55-56, 62, 63, 307-8 n 51; on four 
types of alchemical authors, 32-33; and 
Gower, 57, 59; mentioned, 191, 195,257, 
271,273; on production of metals, 301 nn 
46,47 
Index 
Astraea myth, 166 
astrology, 1,3, 14, 104,303 n 74; and 
alchemy, 13, 104, 126; and astronomy, 55, 
60; attacks on, 65, 262, 270, 275, 284, 286, 
287,288,289,290,291,282; Bacon's 
attitude toward, 105, 106; and Butler, 280, 
282,284,286,287,288,289,290,291; 
defense of, 271, 284 
Astrophi/ and Stella (Sidney), 92 
"As yung Awrora with cristall haile" (Dunbar), 
64-65 
Atalanta Fugiens (Maier), 187,204,249,311 n 
44 
':At a Vacation Exercise" (Milton), 231 
Athothis, 12 
Augmentis Scientiarum (Bacon), 108, 117; 
alchemy and the occult in, 106, 109, 11 o-
Il, 114,115,157 
Aureng-Zebe (Dryden), 194 
Aurifontina Chymica (Houpreght), 220, 222, 
302 n 64 
Aurump/uit(Maier), 127,317n 18 
Avicenna, 26, 38, 42, 84, 204, 310 n 33; 
regarded as alchemical authority, 16, 58 
Avulfanes, 207 
Bacon, Francis, 157, 196, 198,264,270,337 
n 90; alchemy viewed by, 81, 103, 104, 105, 
107,108-9,114-17,118,212,314 n 7, 
314-15 n 18,315 nn 22, 23; astrology 
viewed by, 105, 106, 107,314 n 7; and 
controversy over Art and Nature, 108, 111-
12, 114, 118, 132; and division oflearning, 
105, 107-8; and foundational principles of 
alchemy, 105, 111-14; hylozoistic concep-
tion of matter in works of, 23, 81, 112; and 
jargon of alchemy, 109-10, 266; and a 
methodological reform of alchemy, 2-3, 18, 
63,107,110-11, 193,295,314 n 13,315 n 
23; natural magic viewed by, 105-7,314 nn 
6,7; scientific reform advocated by, 2, 30, 
36,82,105,107,109,110-11,192,199, 
207,263,264,270,272,277,295,328 n 
20; and Vulcan, 108, 140; and Webster, 
270, 272, 273, 276. See also Baconians; 
individual titles 
Bacon, Roger, 7, 38, 41, 273, 281; as authority 
on alchemy, 16,40,98,200,271,287,305 
n 17; and types of alchemy, 7, 8 
Baconians, 125,226 
Baldwin, T.W., 73 
Barclay, Alexander, 2, 70; and alchemical satire, 
64,67-68,71-72,147,296 
Barton, Anne, 120 
Basi/icon Doron Oames VI), 321 n 68 
Bathhurst, Ralph, 275 


--- PAGE 376 ---
Index 
Trismegistus (Everard trans.), 199 
Dr. Faustus (Marlowe), 231 
Donne, John, 48,165,190,323 n 22; 
alchemical ideas in poetry of, 3, 94, 118, 
155,156,158-60,167-68,173,182,241, 
323 n 27, 324 nn 31, 36, 38, 325 n 63; 
alchemical references in poetry of, 156, 157, 
158,160,185,189; and alchemical satire, 
154-55,156-60,322 n 9; alchemy used as 
metaphor for positive qualities by, 160-89, 
190,217,219,246,297; knowledge of 
alchemy, 185-86,316 n 5; mentioned, 2, 4, 
36,71, 92,107,151,194,295; Paracelsian 
ideas in works of, 162,323 n 16, 324-25 n 
47,325 n 64; salvation as alchemical 
allegory in poetry of, 217; source of 
alchemical ideas of, 156,322 n 5. See also 
individual titles 
Dorn, Gerhard, 215, 217 
Douglas, Gavin, 64, 66-67, 68, 71, 296 
dove, 175-76, 176, 179, 191 
dragon, 187 
"Dressing" (H. Vaughan), 242 
Drummond, William, 172 
Drury, Elizabeth, 170-73 
Drury, Sir Robert, 169 
Dryden, John, 194 
Duchesne, Joseph, 6, 39, 202, 203, 269; and 
Webster, 273 
Dumb Lady (Lacy), 11, 195-96, 197-98,211 
Dunbar, William, 64-66, 70, 71, 296 
Duncan, Edgar Hill, 132, 140,248,298-99 n 
2; and Donne, 169, 175, 182-83 
Dunleavy, Gareth, 62-63 
Duodecim Claves (Valentine), 140 
DUff, R.A., 226 
eagle, 175, 176, 178, 179 
Earle, John, 29, 278 
"Easter" (Herbert), 190-91 
Ecclogue. 1613. December 26" (Donne), 173 
Eclogues (Barclay), 67 
Edward III, 79 
Egypt, 38, 264; development of alchemy in, 
12, 13, 14 
"Elegie: Death" (Donne), 324 n 31 
"Elegie on the Lady Marckham" (Donne), 167-
68, 189 
Elegies (Donne), 156 
Elements (Euclid), 287 
Elephant in the Moon (Butler), 286, 343 n 57 
Elias, 35, 36, 220, 270, 303-4 n 82,331 n 58 
"Elixir" (Herbert), 191-92 
elixir vitae, 28, 29, 58, 157 
Elizabeth (Queen of England), 1,94 
Elizabethan drama, 296 
Elizabethan prose, 84-85, 90 
Emblema (Maier), 24, 42,151,321 n 72 
Emerald Table of Hermes (Hermes 
365 
Trismegistus), 20, 24, 200, 201, 237. See 
also Smaragdine Table 
Empedocles, 17 
Enchyridion Physicae Restitutae (D'Espagnet), 
253,279,337-38 n 98 
England's propheticall Merline (Lilly), 284 
enthusiasm, 283, 289, 293; and alchemy, 261, 
263-64,295; attacks on, 260, 261-62, 264-
66,267,268,276,277; and chemistry, 277, 
295 
Enthusiasmus Triumphatus (More), 260, 261-
62,339 n 9 
Epicedes and Obsequies (Donne), 166, 167, 
169,173 
"Epitaph on Himselfe" (Donne), 167,324 n 31 
"Epithalamion" (Spenser), 55 
Erasmus, Desiderius, 33, 74, 78, 79, 82; and 
alchemical satire, 2, 64, 147,296; and 
Chaucer, 53, 75; human nature portrayed 
by, 24, 125, 280; influence of, 71, 89, 91, 
104, 118, 195,296. See also individual titles 
eschatological doctrine, 208, 212, 217, 218-
23,245 
Euclid (Euclides), 207, 287 
Everard, John, 199-200 
"Execration upon Vulcan" Oonson), 318 n 24 
"Exorcism, or The Spector" (Erasmus), 74 
Experiment solitary touching the making of gold 
(Bacon), 115-17 
"Extasie" (Donne), 176 
"Eyes and Tears" (Marvell), 173 
Fabulous Feast (Erasmus), 74 
Faerie Queene (Spenser), 4,93 
Fame and Confession of the Fraternity ofR: C: 
(T. Vaughan), 279 
Familiarium colloquiorum formulae (Erasmus), 
73 
Fasciculus Chemicus (A. Dee), 26, 32, 198 
Ferdinand II, 135 
Ferguson, John, 39,136-37,200,214-15 
Ficino, Marsilio, 21, 37, 265, 304 n 2 
fifteenth-century literature, 2, 38, 42, 44, 63, 
295 
Figfor Momus (Lodge), 97 
Filum Labyrinthi, Sive Formula Inquisitionis 
(Bacon), 104, 109 
FirstAnniversary (Donne), 151, 167, 181, 189 
Flamel, Nicolas, 211, 222, 292, 329 n 39; 
alchemy and Christianiry combined by, 35, 
204,208,215,218,245 
Fludd, Robert, 10, 246, 273, 283, 284; attacks 
on, 23, 312 n 60; Christianized hermeticism 


--- PAGE 378 ---
Index 
hieroglyphics, 267, 268, 290, 340 n 25 
Hill, Christopher, 34, 36, 128,303 n 74 
Hippocrates, 39, 199,329 n 29 
His Exposition of the Hieroglyphicall Figures 
(Flamel), 208-11 
Historia Densi et Rari (Bacon), 115, 117,315 n 
22 
Historia Vtt.e et Mortis (Bacon), 112 
Historical Account of a Degradation of Gold, An 
(Boyle), 181 
History of the Royal Society (Sprat), 294-95 
Histrio-Mastix (Hall), 274-75 
Hobbesian materialism, 18 
Hoccleve, Thomas, 59 
Hollandus, Isaac, 126, 272, 319 n 43 
Hollandus, John Isaac, 126, 319 n 43 
Holmes, Elizabeth, 224-25, 226, 232 
Holmyard, E.J., 8, 12, 133 
homeopathy, 211, 227 
Homeric Hymn to Hermes, 145 
"Honour is so sublime perfection" (Donne), 
162-63, 165-66 
Hooke, Robert, 289 
"Hope" (Cowley), 194 
Hopkins, A.J., 13 
Hopkins, Matthew, 285 
Horace, 231 
Horapollo, 267 
Hortulanus, 38, 41, 58, 201 
Houpreght, John Frederick, 27, 35, 222, 302 n 
64 
Hubicki, Wl'odzimierz, 133, 134, 135 
Hudibras (Butler), 3, 81, 278, 281-92, 342 n 
51,343 n 64 
Huniades, John, 270 
"H. Win Hiber. belligeranti"(Donne), 161 
Hydrolithus Sophicus (Siebmacher), 325 n 63 
Hydropyrographum Hermeticum, 222 
hylozoism, 13,23-24,111,169 
Hymnes of Astr.ea (Davies), 94 
iatrochemistry, 7, 30, 36, 211, 223, 224, 329 n 
29; in alchemical satire, 95,195,198; and 
alchemy, 212, 214; and Paracelsians, 28, 
211,312 n 56 
Icarus, 65 
"II Penseroso" (Milton), 231, 246, 257, 259, 
335-36 n 71 
Imhotep,12 
Incertitudine et Vanitate Scientiarum (Agrippa), 
89,97-98,311 n 46 
India, 13 
"Infinitati Sacrum, 16. August 1601" (Donne), 
186 
Isis, 14 
Islam: development of alchemy in, 14-16 
367 
"I walkt the other day" (H. Vaughan), 238-39, 
240,334 n48 
"I would and would Not" (Breton), 97 
Jabir ibn Hayyan, 15-16,38 
James I Games VI), 1,82,84,162,321 n 68; 
and Jonson's Mercury Vtndicated. 131, 145, 
146,150, 151 
James IV, 64 
James V, 68 
Jason, 14, 127 
Jew of Malta (Marlowe), 100 
"Jews" (H. Vaughan), 245 
Jimmers, Sarah, 290 
Jocus severus (Maier), 181 
John of Leyden, 128 
John of Rupescissa, 38 
Jones, Inigo, 132 
Jonson, Ben: alchemical knowledge of, 119, 
120,123-24,125,126,153,185,246,309 
n 15,316 n 5, 321 n 66; and alchemical 
satire, 3, 36, 42,103,147,155,195,296; 
alchemy viewed by, 33, 119, 131, 151,241, 
318 n 24; and controversy concerning Art 
and Nature, 86, 119, 121, 140, 148, 149-
50,315 n 3; on Donne's Of the Progres of the 
Soule, 172; human nature portrayed by, 24, 
125,280; mentioned, 2, 4,5, 12,26,68, 
71,92, 193, 194, 252, 276, 285; and 
millenarianism, 128, 130,318 n 22; motifs 
taken from Chaucer by, 53; occult interests 
linked with radical protestantism by, 128; 
quoted, 118; and Rosicrucians, 318 n 24, 
319 n 43; and Sendivogius, 79, 119, 132, 
133, 134, 135, 138, 142,319 n 43. See also 
individual titles 
Julius Caesar (Shakespeare), 100, 101 
Jung, Carl, 143, 144, 185-86, 187 
Kelley, Edward, 92, 319 n 42; literary 
references to, 87, 88, 126,285,287,290, 
311 n42 
Kermode, Frank, 225, 226 
Khalid, 15, 16 
Khunrath, Heinrich, 8 
King, Henry, 195 
KingJohn (Shakespeare), 100-10 1, 173 
Kircher, Athanasius, 290 
Kirkringius, Theodore, 27 
Knipperdollinck, Bernt, 128 
Kress, Gunther, 164 
Kuhn, Thomas, 1 
Lacy, John, 11,195,211 
"L'Allegro" (Milton), 246, 259, 335-36 n 71 
Lambsprinck, 187; Book ofLambspringk, 179, 
325 n 57 


--- PAGE 379 ---
368 
Lambye, Giovanni Oohn Baptista), 204, 211 
Langland, William, 37, 55, 57, 63, 71 
Lanthorne and Candle-light (Dekker), 90 
Lapide Philosophico (Lambsprinck), 187 
Lapide philosophorum (Arnald of Villanova), 50 
Learned Commentary (Sibbes), 193 
"Letter to the Lady Carey" (Donne), 323 n 28 
Lewis, C.S., 81 
Lexicon (Ruland), 184, 187 
Libavius, 176 
Liber Secretus (Artephius), 78 
Lieb, Michael, 247, 250 
Lilly, William, 271, 284, 290, 341 n 34 
Lindsay, David, 64, 68, 72 
"Litanie" (Donne), 189 
literature. See fifteenth-century literature; 
fourteenth-century literature; seventeenth-
century literature; sixteenth-century 
literature 
Lodge, Thomas, 37-38, 93, 95, 97-98. See also 
individual titles 
Lovejoy, A.a., 1 
"Loves Alchymie" (Donne), 72, 107, 156, 157-
58, 185,322 n 7 
"Love-sick" (H. Vaughan), 245 
"Loves Progress" (Donne), 184-85 
Lull, Raymond: alchemical authority of, 40, 
247,271, 304-5 n 13; criticism of, 110, 
292; literary references to, 97, 126,273; 
mentioned, 38, 41, 42,87,222,263,279 
Lusus serius (Maier), 181 
Luther, Martin, 10, 193,201,285 
Lydgate, John, 2, 54, 56, 63; Secrees of Old 
Philisoffiestranslated by, 55, 59, 60, 61 
Lyly, John, 4,85,309 n 15; alchemy treated 
by, 2, 37-38,68,84,90,99,296,310 n 25 
"Madame,! You have refin'd mee" (Donne), 
163-64 
MagiaAdamica (T. Vaughan), 239, 329 n 39, 
334 nn 48, 52, 342 n 47 
magic, 112,277,280,282; and alchemy, 8, 
60, 125, 126. See also natural magic 
Mahood, M. M., 240-41 
Maier, Michael: alchemy portrayed by, 8, 19, 
24,127,151,187,204,248,249 
Malleus Maleficarum (Heintich Institoris and J. 
Sprenger), 99 
"Man" (Herbert), 191 
Man in Glory (Anselm), 231 
Mantuan, Baptista, 67 
Margarita philosophica, 40 
Marlowe, Christopher, 85, 99, 231, 296 
Marotti, Arthur, 162, 166 
"Marriage in Name Only, or the Unequal 
Match" (Erasmus), 73 
Index 
Marrow of Alchemy (Philalethes), 29, 326 n 69 
Martin, L. c., 224, 227, 231, 233 
Marvell, Andrew, 4, 173, 174, 194 
Mary the Prophet, 42 
masques, 151,321 nn68, 73. See also Mercury 
Vindicated3 
Matham, Adriaen, 50, 126 
MathematicaliMagick (Wilkins), 278 
Mauer, Margaret, 163 
Mayern, Sir Theodore, 269, 273, 327 n 5 
Mazzeo, Joseph, 169 
Mebane, John S., 128 
Medela Medicina (Nedham), 268 
Medical Remains (Bacon), 117 
Medicina Practica (Salmon), 78 
medicine: and alchemy, 11,21,27-31,65, 
213, 243, 305 n 17 (see also iatrochemistry); 
training in, 196, 327 n 11 
Menaphon (Greene), 85, 88 
Mercury, 12,95,176,187,222-23. See also 
alchemy: sulphur-mercury theory of 
Mercury's Caducean Rod (Mystagogus), 28, 
222-23 
Mercury Vindicated from the Alchemists at Court 
Oonson), 5, 132, 134; alchemy in, 66,86, 
99,118,131,146-47,151,153,296; 
charlatanism attacked in, 118; and 
controversy concerning Art and Nature, 
119,121, 123, 132-33, 140-41, 146, 148, 
149-50,151, 296; as masque, 131-32; 
mentioned, 5; Mercury portrayed in, 12, 95, 
123, 132-33, 140-42, 143, 145-46, 150, 
252; and Sendivogius Dialogue, 79, 119, 
132,133,138-45,146,147-49,150-51, 
153,321 nn 69, 71; transformation in, 120, 
149,151 
Mersenne, Marin, 18,23,301-2 n 56 
Mesopotamia: development of alchemy in, 12, 
13 
Metallographia (Webster), 273 
Metamorphoses (Ovid), 87,145,201, 250 
metaphysical poetty, 155-56 
Micrographia (Hooke), 289 
Middle Ages, 1; alchemy during, 11, 16, 39, 
42,61,63,79,297; worldview during, 2, 
13,17,37,111 
Middle East, 12 
Middleton, Thomas, 2, 84 
Milgate, Wesley, 165 
millenarianism, 262, 270, 281, 303 n 80; and 
alchemical imagery and allegory, 3, 128, 
199,210,211,212,217,218-23,224,245-
46; and alchemy, 34-36, 194,303 n 74 
Milton, John, 2, 194,229,231,272; 
alchemical imagery in works of, 36, 155, 
173-74,198,212,246-47,250,255,260, 


--- PAGE 383 ---
372 
See also individual titles 
Shawcross, John T., 157 
Sheppard, H. J., 11, 19 
Ship of Fools (Barclay), 68-69, 70, 71, 72, 309 
n12 
Sibbes, Richard, 193 
Sidney, Sir Philip, 2, 92, 296 
Siebmacher, Johann Ambrosius, 215-18, 325 n 
63 
Sigismond III, 135 
Silex Scintillam (H. Vaughan), 231, 238, 244; 
hermeticism of, 224, 225, 226, 227, 232, 
245 
Simmonds, James D., 226 
Simpson, Evelyn, 132 
"Sin" (Herrick), 217 
Singer, Dorothea w., 38 
"Sinner" (Herbert), 190 
sixteenth century, 81, 304 n 8 
sixteenth-century literature, 2; and alchemical 
satire, 38, 63, 75-76, 84, 91-92, 103,295-
96; and alchemy, 37, 39, 42, 44, 64, 103, 
104-5,296,297 
Skelton, John, 64, 70-71, 296 
SmaragdineTable, 20, 38, 301 n 54. See also 
Emerald Table of Hermes 
Smith, Sir Thomas, 86 
Sociery of Apothecaries, 197 
Song of Solomon, 14 
Songs and Sonnets (Donne), 156, 173, 174, 
183, 184 
"Sonnet 33" (Shakespeare), 92-93, 173 
"Sonnet 114" (Shakespeare), 93 
"Sonnet 119" (Shakespeare), 93 
Sparrow, John, 263, 264, 277 
Spenser, Edmund, 55, 93 
Sprat, Thomas, 81, 110, 266, 294-95 
Starkey, George, 29-31, 218, 272, 302 n 67, 
328 n 20. See also Philalethes, Eirenaeus 
"Starre" (H. Vaughan), 232, 333-34 n 42 
Steele, Robert, 59,79,308 n 57 
Stephanos of Alexandria, 14 
Stobaei Hermetica (Stobaeus), 236-37 
Stobaeus, Joannes, 237 
Stoicism, 233-34 
Stolcius, Daniel, 138 
Stone of the Philosophers (anonymous), 86-87 
Strange Horse-Race (Dekker), 90-91, 173 
Strange Newes (Nashe), 86, 87 
Summa perfoctionis magisterii (Geber), 15, 16, 
301 n40 
"Sunne Rising" (Donne), 156-57, 158, 166, 
322n6 
Svendsen, Kester, 247, 252-53 
Swift, Jonathan, 280, 287, 294; alchemical 
satire by, 3, 36, 281, 282, 296 
Index 
SylvaSylvarum(Bacon), 112-13, 114, 115, 117 
Symbola aure£ Mem£ (Maier), 19,248 
Symposium (Plato), 266 
synteresis, 233, 333 n 34 
Table-Talk (Luther), 10, 193,201 
Tale of a Tub (Swift), 297 
Tamburlaine, Part II (Marlowe), 99,101,231, 
313 n 70 
Taoism, 12 
Temple (Herbert), 3,154,190 
Te"ors of the Night (Nashe), 88 
Theatrum Chemicum (Lazarus Zetzner), 136, 
138 
Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum (Ashmole), 
42,55,62,81; engravings in, 32,191, 257; 
works reprinted in, 56, 60, 63, 91,195 
Theophrastus, 14,29 
Thomas, Keith, 1, 128,264 
Thor, George, 220 
Thorndike, Lynn, 40,79, 113, 136-37,304-5 
n 13; on development of alchemy, 39, 304 
nn4,5 
Thoth,12 
Tillage of Light (Scot), 214; and esoteric 
alchemy, 10-11, 26, 31-32; physical 
transmutation denied in, 205-8, 211 
Timaeus(Plato), 17-18,255 
Timon of Athens (Shakespeare), 100 
Thornburgh, John, 204 
"To Alchemists" Oonson), 118 
"To E. of D. with six holy Sonnets" (Donne), 
168-69, 172,324 n 32 
"To Sir H W. at his going Ambassador to 
~nice"(Donne), 161-62 
"To Sr. Henry W0tton"(Donne), 160,322-23 n 
12 
"To the Countesse oJBedford" (Donne), 162, 
164-66 
"To the Countesse of Huntingdon" (Donne), 
166-67,172, 181, 323 n 27 
"To the Holy Bible" (H. Vaughan), 242-43 
Tractatus Aureus (Hermes), 78 
Tractatus de Lapide (anonymous), 222 
transitional poets, 64-71, 73, 76 
Treatise concerning Enthusiasme (Casaubon), 
263 
Treatise of Sulphur (Sendivogius), 35, 138, 139, 
218 
Trevisan, Bernard, 222, 263 
Tripus aureus (Maier), 8 
Triumphant Chariot of Antimony (Valentine), 
27 
Turba Philosophorum, 42 
Twelve Keys (Valentine), 80 
"Twicknam garden" (Donne), 167 
